---
layout: post
title: Why Visual Studio 2015 has changed my life
description: I've been using Visual Studio on an almost daily basis since 2002, the 2015 release feels like a huge paradigm shift, comparable to Visual Studio 6 to 2002.
date: 2015-07-24
categories: ['Visual Studio']
group: 'Software Development'
---

I've been using Visual Studio on an almost daily basis since 2002\. Before that, my development tool of choice was Visual Basic 6 (Visual Studio 6). The shift between those two versions felt like using a whole new product at the time. Since then, changes to Visual Studio have been incremental. Microsoft have released a new version every 2-3 years. Visual Studio 2015, however, feels like another significant paradigm shift. The point of this post is not to outline all the shiny new features, there are [official blog posts for that](http://blogs.msdn.com/b/somasegar/archive/2015/07/20/visual-studio-2015-and-net-4-6-available-for-download.aspx). No. I wanted to tell you how the changes to Visual Studio have directly changed the way I work on a day to day basis.

## Visual Studio Tasks (Task Runner Explorer)

The wider web development community has been using task runners, GruntJS and more recently GulpJS, for at least the last few years. On every project I work on these days, I use TypeScript and SASS. Web essentials previously was responsible for compiling my SASS files, as well as providing linting for both SASS and TypeScript. With the 2015 release, this functionality has been removed. There are a bunch of [Mads Kristensen extensions on Visual Studio Gallery](https://visualstudiogallery.msdn.microsoft.com/site/search?query=mads%20kristensen&f%5B0%5D.Value=mads%20kristensen&f%5B0%5D.Type=SearchText&ac=2) that you can install that will add this functionality back in. However, why not cut out the middle man and set up these tasks yourself? With tasks you can; _ Automatic SASS/SCSS compilation using Ruby gem (and a watcher that "listens" for changes to files as you make them) _ SCSS and TypeScript Linting, with your own linting configuration files directly in the project (perfect for sharing with team members) _ Better bundling and minification. You can use something like [UglifyJS](https://github.com/mishoo/UglifyJS) instead of the old ASP .NET bundler (which was horribly buggy!) _ But most importantly, the door is open to a world of possibility. Tasks enable you to automate tedious repetitive tasks and share those efficiencies easily with your team, whilst not restricting you to a particular subset of tools.

## Reduced dependence on ReSharper

I've been a fan of [ReSharper](https://www.jetbrains.com/resharper/) for a long time and I've even [blogged about why I can't work without it](/career/15-reasons-why-i-cant-work-without-jetbrains-resharper/). All this said, however, its truth time. I don't _want_ to have to depend on a third party tool to make my IDE more useful. I want Visual Studio to be awesome enough on its own that I don't have to install any third party tools to make it usable. ReSharper introduced the lightbulb menu several major versions ago. The lightbulb menu introduces many code refactorings, such as implement interface, refactor this, and so many I can hardly think. The newly introduced native [lightbulb menu in Visual Studio 2015](<https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/dn872466(v=vs.140).aspx>) adds some nice refactorings. Unfortunately, Visual Studio 2015 doesn't go quite far enough in this respect, hence why the section is named **Reduced** dependence on ReSharper. I do expect this feature to get a lot of attention during this release, assuming that the open source community can tap into it easily enough.

## Lambda Expressions

Lambda expressions and LINQ were introduced in version 3.0 of the .NET Framework, roughly 8 years ago. Debugging support for lambda expressions was non existent in the first versions, and was incrementally improved over time. To start off with, you couldn't debug any method that contained a lambda expression. Not only that, but if any method in the call stack contained a lambda expression, even if your method did not contain a lambda expression, you couldn't use edit and continue. Then a subsequent release solved this problem, you could still not edit and continue a method that contained a lambda expression, but the call stack problem was gone. Now with Visual Studio 2015, you get the full debugging experience. You can edit methods that contain lambda expressions, and you can edit lambda expressions directly, and edit & continue in the same way you could with any other code before. This is a major time-saver. You've never been able to add watches or use the immediate window to debug lambda expressions. With Visual Studio 2015, this is no longer the case. Rejoice.

## Summary

Visual Studio has introduced the task runner explorer, which can run tasks on various IDE events (Open, before/after build etc.). This really opens the door to "the rest of the web development world", where sophisticated tooling exists to automate mundane tasks such as bundling, linting, pre/post processing and so much more. Developers are no longer tied to doing things the Visual Studio way. Other enhancements such as the lightbulb menu and better debugging will save developers time and reduce dependence on third party tooling.
